The Monty Hall Problem
Or how to double your chances of winning a car by getting your probabilities right
Michał Oleszak
Michał Oleszak
Mar 12 · 5 min read






Two goats, one car. Image by the author.
The Monty Hall problem is a decades-old brain teaser that’s still confusing people today. It is loosely based on an old American TV game show and is named after its host, Monty Hall. At the final stage of the game, the contestants would face a choice in which, by choosing correctly, they could double their chance of winning a brand-new car. But guess what: most of them did not! Would you be wiser? Read on to find out!

Let’s play the game
There are three closed doors in front of you. Behind one of them, there is a brand-new car. Behind each of the other two, there is a goat. For the sake of the argument, let’s assume you’d rather have the car than a goat. Your job is to pick one of the doors and you will win whatever’s behind it. Once you’ve placed your bet, the game host opens one of the remaining two doors, revealing a goat. Then, they ask you: are you staying with the initial door choice, or would you like to switch to the other closed door. Should you switch?
Spoiler alert: yes, you definitely should. Switching doubles your chances to win!

Intuition: Getting the probabilities right
If you think that it doesn’t matter whether you switch or not, you’re not alone. According to one study, 88% of us wouldn’t switch. The popular reasoning is as follows: you pick one door that could hide the car or a goat. Then, another door is opened revealing the goat, so you stay with too closed doors: one with the car, and the other with the second goat. Hence, the chance is 50/50, so it doesn’t matter whether you switch or not, right? Wrong!
By the way, when faced with what they think is a coin-flip choice, people tend to stay with their initial bet. That’s due to a well-known psychological effect that makes us feel worse if we switch and lose (I knew I was right!) compared to when we stay and lose. Consequently, most of us would stay with the initially chosen door.
So, what is the probability of winning the car if we don't switch? That’s easy, it’s 1/3 or 33% since we are picking one of three doors at random.
The tricky part is to realize that if you do switch, the winning chances are twice as much: 2/3 or 66%! That’s because when one of the doors not picked is opened by the host, new information becomes available.

Image by the author.
Say you’ve picked door no. 1. The probability that it hides the car is 1/3. The key insight is that that’s the same as saying that the probability that the car is behind doors 2 or 3 is 2/3. The game host, who knows the car is behind number 3, has no choice but to open door no. 2:

Image by the author.
Now, you know there is a 2/3 probability that the car is behind doors 2 or 3, and that it’s NOT behind number 2. Hence, the probabilities you’re left with are 1/3 for door number 1 and 2/3 for door number 3.
No matter which door you choose and which hides the car, the reasoning above always holds.

Listing all combinations
Still not convinced? Another way to look at the problem is to list all possible scenarios and see how often you would win. Say you’ve picked door no. 1.

Image by the author.
If the car is indeed behind door 1, then the host will open any of the doors 2 or 3. If you stay, you win the car, you if switch, you get a goat.
If the car is behind door 2, the host will have no option but to open door 3. In this case, switching from 1 to 2 will get you the car.
Similarly, when the car is behind door 3, switching from 1 to 2 will let you get it.
Since the car can be behind any of the doors with 1/3 probability, you can see that switching is a better strategy: it offers the car in 2 out of 3 equally likely scenarios, that is with a probability of 2/3.

Simulation
The math cannot lie, but the truth is so unintuitive, that I was very curious to see empirical evidence. After a brief consideration to actually play the game, say, a hundred times (with the cups, a candy, and nothing standing for the doors, the car, and the goat, respectively), I wrote a python function to do it for me. It plays the game 1000 times, following one of the two strategies: always switch or never switch, and prints out the percentage of games won.

Let’s play.

Indeed, switching doubles the chances of winning!

Plot twist
Consider this plot twist: there are 1000 doors, one with a car, and 999 hiding goats. You pick one. The host opens 998 out of the remaining 999 doors, revealing only goats. Do you switch to the other closed door? If you think about it in a similar way as we’ve just done, switching offers you a 99.9% chance of winning the car, while by staying, you have a one-in-a-thousand, or 0.1% chance of winning!

Thanks for reading! If you liked this post, try one of my other articles. Can’t choose? Pick one of these: